So I think we actually do have a
national emergency and certainly you
know policy makers and companies
understand that when China shut off
access and so you have
>> that was the moment
>> I think that was the moment where it
really hit that that not only over
reliance but a up to 100% reliance
that's like that I mean the Chinese cut
off access to the technology that they
had developed for refining for
extracting they actually when we had
that one-year pause. Uh, one of the
things that um that the Council on
Foreign Relations partner um Silverado
um policy accelerator, they had done a
lot of work on
what the what China was actually
exporting after um after that October
lifting of the of the um export
controls. They're exporting um magnets,
but they're not exporting those rare
earths or the technology that we need to
actually um produce the same for
ourselves.
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLotss podcast. I'm Jill
Weisenthal [music]
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway. Tracy, you know,
we do these episodes on various areas of
technology in which China is perceived
to be ahead of the US.
>> They're very interesting and I learn a
lot. It's not obvious to me like what
lessons there are or anything. Some of
this some of these things it's like
we're really far behind. I don't think
we're ever going to catch up. This is
very interesting and academic, but what
exactly is the point of talking about
all this? I don't know if there's
anything to do with this information.
You know what I thought you were going
to say is that we are sometimes accused
of identifying strategic choke points or
areas of difficulty on the podcast and
then coming up with absolutely no
solutions for how to fix them.
>> I I will be the first to admit I have no
solutions. If someone accuses me of
saying you have not offered any
solutions, you know what? I just say
that's not my job. I'm I'm just a mere
podcaster. I'm just asking questions. We
enunciate the problem and leave it to
others to figure out.
>> We leave it we leave the problem to
others to figure out. But you know there
are there are people who are doing more
than identifying choke points. There are
people who are identifying uh areas and
uh vulnerabilities etc. Some people
actually are thinking about solutions
and they're not all pie in the sky. Um,
you know, I've seen people on Twitter.
It's like, oh, I know how to sort of uh
be more like uh Chinese and you know,
why don't we just adopt
>> how to be more You've seen people on
Twitter talking about how to be more
Chinese. Is it Chinese Joe Wis?
>> No, they just say, why don't you just
why doesn't the US just adopt Marxist
Leninism with Chinese characteristics?
It's really that simple. And then we can
do this.
>> On a serious note, the one you see most
often is, well, why doesn't the US just
ease up on some of its regulation like
China in order to get things done
quickly? That's the truth. spend more
money or something like that. Encourage
actors to pursue things that aren't
necessarily so short-term, etc. Yes,
there are in theory uh solutions.
Anyway, let's have a conversation which
we actually talk about ideas that may be
somewhere in the realm of feasible.
>> Excellent. I'm ready. And this is also
this is on an interesting topic that's
come up a number of times on odd
thoughts at this point.
>> That's right. So we're going to be
talking about a very core topic and of
course this is the US vulnerability to
sort of strategic minerals, rare earths
etc which we know that China dominates
which in theory of China were to
completely shut off access uh you know
not military high-tech etc all kinds of
problems. So what do we actually what
could actually be done to alleviate this
vulnerability? We really do have the
perfect
>> and China's dominance was also a crucial
turning point in the trade negotiations
with the US and also I think you get a
sense of I don't want to say desperation
on the US side but like maybe urgency on
the US side just by looking at the
headlines that seem to come out on a
nearly daily basis about like oh we
found a huge critical mineral deposit in
Utah so you know we're all saved. Uh
it's also worth noting before we go
further, this is an area in which
there's probably a decent amount of
overlap from the last administration to
this one. We did an episode uh a little
while ago with Peter Harrell um who
talked about some of these deals that
the administration is making with equity
stakes and private companies. Um I think
Vulcan came up as one of them. And so,
yes, we're going to be talking about
what where further we can go in terms of
actually having a healthy robust
domestic mark uh domestic environment
for our own strategic commodities, etc.
Anyway, we really do have the perfect
guest. We're going to be speaking with
Heidi Kribo Reker. She's a senior fellow
at the Council on Foreign Relations, a
former chief economist at the State
Department, and she is the co-author of
a brand new report for the CFR looking
at exactly this question. What can the
US do in this room? So Heidi, thank you
so much for coming on the Oddlos
podcast.
>> Thanks for having me on.
>> Uh tell us what is uh what's this new
report all about?
>> So So you're right that everyone's
identified the problem and that uh I
mean it's been a long time coming. This
is like a slow train coming at us um for
for decades at this point. It's not a
surprise that China uh has dominated
this market for a variety of reasons and
it's not a surprise that they've
weaponized it. They've done it over the
years. we did pay attention but we sort
of forgot about it um in many ways but
right now we have an inflection point
where we really need to get this sort of
damocles off of uh off of the United
States and actually it's it's really we
our challenge is the same challenge that
a lot of other advanced economies have
right now with this incredible chokeold
not just on critical minerals but
particularly rare earths particularly
heavy rare earths that are the
foundation of magnets which go in
everything.
>> Can I um just back up in history for a
second because I think it will help us
contextualize where we are right now.
But what were the conditions that
allowed China to basically gain
dominance in this particular area? Did
they make a strategic decision at some
point saying, you know, we're going to
be the world's uh not manufacturer of
min of rare minerals and rare earths,
but we're going to we're going to make
this, you know, a priority for
ourselves.
>> Yes. uh made in 2025 uh was their big
strategic plan. They had invested a lot
in in rare earths, you know,
particularly their domestic rare earths
um to like many many years before that.
But they decided they wanted to dominate
and they really they did a very smart
job of creating an entire ecosystem. So
both domestic China extraction
processing and then they came up with
the all of the products that were that
would be the leading demand um which you
really need to have for the creation of
a market and the demand meaning the you
know new energy um wind turbines
uh particularly their you know their
their EVs and also defense. So you have
a whole like demand pull and you also
have state companies that don't have to
be profitable and that's pretty key if
you're competing around the globe to uh
to actually mine and process. They also
have a lockold on the technology for
processing and so in traditional mining
you know they have really they've made a
massive strategic investment and we for
a variety of reasons did not. Joe, this
reminds me of the episode we did with
Dan Wong where he made sort of similar
points about the tech ecosystem that's
developed around Shenzen and how that
like allows innovation to really thrive.
And then also this idea that well if you
don't necessarily care about returns on
capital as much as the US certainly then
you kind of have a leg up when you're
developing something like this that
might not pay off for a very long time.
And this always seems to be an issue
when we're talking about some matters of
national defense because right when it
comes to national security, you have
this other priority that is not profit
related. Everything that we've done that
has some every episode we've talked
about this comes up whether we're
talking about literally the defense
industries and the defense suppliers or
other strategic things. Here is this
other goal that you have in which profit
can't be the only you have at least two
bottom lines. one is related to security
and one's related to profit and so you
have this tension tell us how did you do
this report what was the process by
which this was you researched this who
did you talk to etc so that you could uh
publish this
>> so the I mean the the report itself is
on how while we put all of the emphasis
on uh on mining on the extraction coming
up with the processing and the uh the
end products for example magnets the the
thing is we can't actually outmine
out process and outspend China certainly
not at scale and and not in a
cost-effective way. So what is another
we have basically a huge timing
mismatch. Will we get there eventually
with friends, allies, you know, all of
the different countries that are working
on the same problem together
eventually, but it's going to take a
very long time and we don't really have
time. So we looked at how innovation
could actually um leapfrog the China
chokeold on critical minerals and
particularly rare earths. And so that
was really the starting point. How do
you solve for national and economic
security in a way that really plays to
US strength in innovation? And um and
then when we took a look around, we
found there were some really exciting
companies that had taken research and
development from like 15 years ago and
they were ready to scale and starting to
scale and so that was really what the
excitement was about. Just real quickly,
would you say you took a look around
like what was the pro? How did you sort
of identify the people like who did you
talk to and how did you identify the
people who pointed you to look there's a
lot of interesting genuine science and
tech that can be uh scaled up? How did
that process work?
>> So I started with the national labs
because we we don't give enough credit
to the fact that a lot of the great
innovations that come out and are
commercialized uh that we all we all
know and love actually had their origin
in our national lab system. sort of a
national jewel. And so Ames National Lab
has this critical material innovation
hub. And a lot of the companies that are
doing this this like the various types
of breakthrough technology came out of
or are working with Ames National Lab.
And so I started like poking around from
there and then really word of mouth. So,
as soon as as soon as we got the word
out that we were working on this, it's a
it's a very enthusiastic
uh mission-driven community that wants
to all leapfrog this challenge through
innovation.
>> Plus, people like talking about their
problems, right?
um describe for us the state of the US I
guess rare earth's industry at the
moment and then also what you would
describe as the key choke point in this
particular strategic choke point like
where is the biggest source of trouble
or inability to actually do this at
scale so in terms of there they're two
different parts the US used to produce a
significant amount of of rarers you know
primarily light rare earths MP materials
um in Mountain Pass mine uh had, you
know, a variety of challenges, including
not being commercially viable, but that
was not the only reason. But we do
actually have rare earths in the United
States. And we and we were a mining, you
know, a mining powerhouse many years
ago. I mean, remember like California
49ers and people going out with picks
and shovels?
>> Yeah. Many, many years ago,
>> many years ago. So, we do have mines and
we have resources, but there are always,
you know, there always consequences and
trade-offs there. you know to mine is
often toxic. You have environmental
concerns. You have a lot of waste that
through traditional mining um gets
generated. So we were more than happy
for the Chinese to take on that um those
set of problems and then sell them to us
at a very low cost. That's how we all
became dependent on them. And uh and so
that is uh I I think where we are right
now. We do have a lot of partnerships
that are being formed and you know with
Saudi with uh South Korea the Australia
I mean we're sort of doing what we can
to go the traditional mining route but
the I think the really interesting thing
is how we can get there like much faster
much cleaner and with much more cost
effectiveness and even competitiveness
cost competitiveness with China through
some of these new technologies mining in
the US. Let's talk about them. When we
when you talk about the technologies
that could actually get us to par or
something like that, are they more on
the mining side? Are they more on the
refining side or both? Like let's talk
about these technologies.
>> Okay, so let me give you let me give you
a couple of examples. So back when China
cut off Japan's rare earth access in
2010,
the department of energy through its uh
I mean people don't know ARPA generally.
they think of DARPA but but Department
of Energy has its own research um grant
facility and they do big problems and
put them out there. So they did this in
2011 they sprinkled around a lot of
grant research funding for
materials that you could create a magnet
with that did not require rare earths
and lo and behold the company in a
scientist in Minnesota University of
Minnesota created a rare earthfree
magnet. So there's a material design
approach to this that either drastically
reduces how much rare earth you actually
need in magnets and there's a company um
called Nyron Magnetics that actually is
it's commercialized it's scaling it
actually is is you know scaling up
massively a new facility in Minnesota.
So that's sort of the material
engineering approach to it. And then
there's this whole other basket of of
biot tech um innovations and you know
I'll if you want me to go into this
please. Yeah.
>> Okay. So so you know there there
companies like um alter research
technology and they again are affiliated
with this as national lab. They uh they
have programmed proteins. So those
proteins are are basically like um like
robots that go in to waste. And I'll get
to to sort of the importance of waste in
a minute, but they will go into waste or
other types of uh of tailings, things
that come out of of mines, and they will
go in and specifically target the
protein will target a specific rare
earth and extract it. And so it is
clean, it's fast, it it relies on um on
a very large resource that we have. We
have a lot of waste. Um so it's a
domestic, you know, it's a domestically
sourced uh resource. There are a number
of other, you know, ways that we are
very in a very clean, fast, and cost
competitive way using technology to
actually mine waste. And uh and that's
actually one of our it's like we we
shouldn't consider waste at this point
to be a liability. is literally
America's next mind.
>> So, I have a serious question. Um, but
first,
>> first joke, [laughter]
>> first, no, first, I'm so curious about
the little pro protein robots. What does
that process actually look like?
>> So, I don't know what the I I don't
know. I'm I'm not a I'm not a molecular,
you know, technologist. And, uh,
>> molecular technologist, if they're
listening, that'll be the follow-up
episode. But there um but this is
something that's been again long in the
making in terms of of the tech that's
been developed and so it's basic you you
know that this particular company is
commercializing the technology but it is
um it's a protein that is altered so
that it can go in and sort of
microtarget
specific rare earth elements and that is
um I think it's kind of revolutionary
it's super disrup disruptive and the
same with all of these companies that
that were part of this um this study
that we did. They are at the they are at
the cusp of being ready to scale and
scale fast.
>> All right, this is my next serious
question which is you know all of this
sounds great. Protein robots sounds
amazing. Why aren't we doing this
already if the technology exists? So,
we're focused on, and this is, you know,
this this takes a um a a strategy and a
and a strategy that focuses on the
innovation side. We're very focused on
the how do we compete head-on with
traditional mining and that's good and
it's important. This is a huge
complement to that. We haven't really
done it yet. We've done it peacemeal. So
you have a lot of uh a lot of people in
this community that are highly focused
on the technology commercializing it
early stage and then figuring out how to
go from there. Uh the um I think we have
again a it's a huge opportunity that's
out there. When I think about where we
are, I think about the shale revolution
and how we had fracking technology for
for like decades and then we reached a
point where that technology unlocked an
energy revolution in the United States
and it was like an overnight switch
flipped and suddenly we're an energy
giant, an energy producing giant. And so
I do feel there's something similar in
what we're seeing right now in the
technology around critical minerals and
rare earths.
>> I think we could really use a big switch
flip to suddenly have abundance. Those
don't come along very often. We should
um people have to appreciate that more.
I'm reading this press release from
Berkeley. As reported in nano letters,
the researchers genetically engineered a
harmless virus to act like a quote smart
sponge that grabs rare earth metal rare
earth metals from water and with a
gentle change in temperature and acidity
releases them for collection. Sounds
really cool. I'll have to go uh watch
YouTube later. Talk to us about um one
of the themes that comes up in a lot of
these conversations is the importance of
offtake agreements. Yes. So right like
right now we can American companies they
currently do have access to Chinese rare
earths and so it may might be very risky
for anyone to invest in these
technologies knowing that at least for
the very you know the beginning years
when before the cost curve has come down
the uh competitors might be cheaper
>> the proverbial valley of death.
>> Yeah. How do you solve that problem um
of guaranteeing that there is demand for
when these companies uh release harmless
viruses that act like a smart sponge and
grab rare earth metals from water? So
first there has to be this is not just
on government to do. I mean a lot of
people point at the massive you know
very muscular industrial policy that the
Trump administration is using right now
and I think that that is that is a very
good thing. But it also takes uh it
takes companies actually coming together
more in a consorcia uh type of
arrangement to have collective offtake
agreements. You have certain companies
that have been very forwardleaning in
their offtake agreements with certain uh
I mean Nyron is a good case that um that
they have some auto um OEMs that have
been working with them for for years
now. you have I mean Vulcan you brought
up earlier but Vulcan is kind of the
poster child for when you get the
technology the industrial policy and the
commercial all together working um to to
solve and they're and they actually are
I think they're the first innovation um
targeted uh industrial policy scale up
rapid scale up Vulcan's only three years
old they they closed their series A in
August I mean we're talking about 1.4
billion that they got in a in a in a um
consortium together with uh a company
called um Reelement that recycles
magnets. They take the rare earths and
they actually manufacture magnets. That
is that is incredibly interesting. They
do it on a they're doing it on a on a
like a super fast um scaling time time
horizon. I think they are aiming for
2027 to start rolling product out and
have been going through the validation
process with all of their their
different types of magnets. So they're
doing this on an accelerated basis. They
got funded by every branch in the
military. So they have a builtin supply,
you know, a demand from the US military
right there. They also have
semiconductor and um and aerospace.
They're really looking to target the
national security and the top economic
security challenges. and they have the
partners to do that. So I think that's a
good example of how we want to do this
moving forward.
>> Adjacent to the offtake issue, who
actually owns the wastewater that we
could potentially be, you know,
extracting valuable things from?
>> So we have lots of different types of
waste. So we have I mean we have coal
ash, we have tailings from mines that
are still operating where they extract
like the the the super valuable part of
and the easy to extract and then they
have all the other mine tailings that
just sit there that have a lot of for
example rare earths in them. They have
we have uh you know we have some really
really toxic areas that uh that are
sitting in ponds and and you know
provide like giving a lot of problems to
water supplies and uh we have a huge
amount of of waste that we can draw from
uh industrial waste that comes from from
mines um where you have primary metals
that are ex that are extracted but you
the piles of tailings that sit there on
the side because they are either not uh
there's no commercial viability to
extract them or they are you know
they're just considered they're
considered piles of waste both in
operating mines and in in mines that
have closed down. You have coal ash that
is you know sort of toxic leftover waste
from from coal mining. You have e-waste
which is I think one of the more
promising areas. We actually, if you
look at old uh hard drives and cell
phones and batteries and the like, there
are tons of uh of rare earths that are
in there and actually magnets that are
in there from years, you know, when when
we actually had much greater rare earths
uh you know, intensity in those magnets
before we started to like having to have
to scale back. So if you look at the
waste ecosystem, we have a lot of
domestic um opportunity. And that's
actually why I think Vulcan is a really
good example. They pull from domestic
recycled e-waste and then they process
and manufacture magnets in a completely
domestic cycle.
>> Joe, that's interesting about coal ash.
I could have uh I could have been mining
my ashes from burning the coal stove in
Connecticut that first year, mining them
for rare earths. If only I had known.
Yet another yet another missed
opportunity [laughter] to exploit that
>> to monetize my natural resources
>> to monetize all the natural resources on
your land that you had in Connecticut.
Um let's talk about Okay, so we
understand there's various uh uh
measures and opportunities and resources
and technological opportunities and
things that work in a lab, things that
are already uh uh scaling up etc. talk
to us more like from a policy
perspective. What do we need to do to
get from what we already have cooking
and what's already in the works to where
we feel good about where we are and from
does policy would it need to happen in
the form of legislation or does the
government the federal government as
currently constituted have the cash and
the policy levers to pull without um new
laws being passed? So
policy plays an enormous role and the
the first thing we need to do is
actually understand that we can't do a
fragmented approach to this because you
end up losing innovation that might
actually change the the chess board
entirely with China. Um you also have to
deal with with waste from a policy basis
because we actually don't track waste.
It was very hard to find data on how
much e-waste the US produces. We ship
some of it to Asia that is very likely
fed back into China's massive recycling
machine. We shouldn't be exporting if
you if you consider this as America's
next mind. There there ways to address
policy um that can you know provide the
data maybe restrict the exports till we
know exactly what value is hidden inside
all of the stuff that we're exporting
and and then come up with a whole like a
whole strategy that is a critical
minerals innovation strategy that sits
alongside our other critical minerals
strategy and develop that um through not
only the policy tools around waste but
also financial tools
Where are the valleys of death? Where do
we find them? How can we solve them? How
can we use government as a as a um a
pull to get companies together in
consorcia to actually have those offtake
agreements early on and also work with
the material engineers to design what
they're going to need earlier on in the
process. There like there are a lot of
good ways to do this. One of the big
takeaways is that there is a specific
equity valley of death that a venture
like entity could help solve this for
because you don't have the venture
outside of some really big frontier you
know risktakers that will invest in um
in difficult technology. So I think
having some kind of a counter that we
have now in the you know in the
instruments the DoD has you know we have
a whole range of different agencies that
have all loan based they're they're
almost all loan based instruments and
that's not what it this is like these
are tech companies and they really can't
sustain debt. They're not there. You
need to have that VC come in early on
and help them through various series of
fundraising, partner with others, bring
in other part like private VCs
throughout the process. And we need to
and and we do have one of those right
now. Um that is Inqel. It is not
technically I don't know if you you've
heard of Inqutel before.
>> Is it the CIA's VC?
>> It is.
>> Okay.
>> Very good. Um and they they are actually
they they recognize this gap in the
capital structure and the and the actual
ability for these
>> um breakthrough technologies to fund
raise. And so they actually created a
separate fund within INQEL called their
compass fund.
>> And they're not just the it's not just
the CIA, they're they're a nonprofit.
They work for sort of across the
intelligence agencies. And they've grown
over the past 25 years from what they
started out um which was really a very
like a boutique VC for specific solving
specific problems for the intelligence
world. Um so they have invested and
actually going back to one of your
earlier questions. How did I find these
companies? Well, it ends up that they
have invested they invested in two um
companies that I had found through Ames
National Lab. And so it was uh I think
they were extremely helpful in in
thinking through what the gaps actually
were and we really nailed this early
stage um VC needing to come from
government. It's a market failure. Until
we have solved for that market failure,
these will just lie on the shelf.
>> Inqell has one mission to be the most
sophisticated source of strategic
technical knowledge and capabilities to
the US government and its allies. That's
through capital. That's an interesting
one. We should we should do an episode
on it.
>> We should for sure.
>> Um, okay. So, since we're talking about
the CIA and you brought up the military
earlier, um,
>> this is going to be a natural segue, I
promise. Um, you bring up a historical
analogy in your paper, a previous choke
point that was militarily very very
significant for the US at a very very
historical time which we actually
managed to solve through industrial
policy. How much relevance does that
particular analogy have to our current
situation?
>> Well, I love this analogy because in um
in as we were contemplating entering
World War II, the Japanese cut off the
supply chain for natural rubber in
Southeast Asia. And we were dependent on
this flow for 90% of our rubber,
>> right? And we can't grow rubber trees,
right? rubber. Rubber came from
Southeast Asia for a reason. And what we
did was we actually um we took
technology, synthetic rubber technology,
and we scaled it like crazy. So, we
actually were able to um provide for,
you know, for for trucks and tanks and
everything that rubber goes into that we
had never even thought about but until
it was gone. And we were not able to to
actually enter World War II without the
ability to provide something in
replacing that rubber supply. And so we
did it both through a rapid warp speed
Manhattan project like I mean we think
of Manhattan project for the for the
atomic bomb but at the same time I think
there's a good case to be made that
without synthetic rubber we would not
have won World War II. The the other
side of that was that we did a huge, you
know, all of the population should chuck
in their extra rubber tires and their
raincoats and their garden hoses and
whatever you could for the war effort so
that we could actually um use and
recycle
>> um rubber that we had already here. So,
it's a two-prong, I think, analogy that
works. There are some um great like
posters from World War II about
recycling your tires and things like
that. Nice graphic design
>> to find go. I have boxes of like old old
iPhones and stuff uh that randomly
recycle them for the rare earth. I I bet
I have like 10 lap 10 old laptops and
random stuff
>> and and the way that I mean the way that
the cycles of of like upgrades happen. I
mean, everybody has tons of like old
laptops where the software doesn't work
anymore. And so, this is actually a huge
opportunity. So, we if we could we could
actually make it a national priority.
And there are ways to do that through
government incentives. Um, you know, you
can there are ways that companies can do
that through paying for old, you know,
old unused, unusable
uh technologies and and uh and the like
and then have uh maybe get the a
government credit. There are like a lot
of ways you can be creative. Yeah. About
getting this um this entire system to
rev up.
>> You mentioned warp speed just then and
so you know the obvious thing that comes
to mind is also the vac the COVID
vaccination efforts. Um can these types
of programs exist without a coinciding
national emergency to sort of galvanize
everyone into action? And I totally take
it that competing with China is one of
those rare areas of bipartisan agreement
nowadays. But at the same time,
shortages, potential choke points in
rare earths has been a longunning issue.
We've been aware of it for a while. So
far, we haven't really done that much.
What's going to galvanize people now and
really lend this whole effort a sense of
urgency? So I think we actually do have
a national emergency and certainly you
know policy makers and companies
understand that when China shut off
access and so you have
>> that was the moment
>> I think that was the moment where it
really hit that that not only over
reliance but a up to 100% reliance
that's like that I mean the Chinese cut
off access to the technology that they
had developed for refining for
extracting they actually when we had
that one year pause. Uh, one of the
things that um that the Council on
Foreign Relations partner um Silverado
um policy accelerator, they had done a
lot of work on
what the what China was actually
exporting after um after that October
lifting of the of the um export
controls. They're exporting um magnets,
but they're not exporting those rare
earths or the technology that we need to
actually um produce the same for
ourselves.
>> Yeah. It's interesting that like they
won't export the rare earth, but they'll
export the finished material, which is
>> the end component.
>> Yeah. Well, you want to uh you want to
climb the value chain, right? And give
away the low margin uh the low margin
sales. Do you feel like um you know I
mentioned it seems like there is some
continuity on some of this stuff from
the last administration to this one. Do
you when you're in DC talking to people
do you s from the on the policy side or
on the government side do you feel that
there is a sort of intensity and focus
because again when you you know you talk
go back to World War II one thing I
associate with that time is just an
incredible amount of like focus on
solving specific things and
coordination. Do you sense that that
exists right now? So just as with World
War II, there were there were a lot of
officials flagging the fact that we were
overdependent on single sources or um
when it was like the the the check the
choke point was the shipping lanes and
there's a huge parallel here. We have
during the during the Biden
administration
um one of the first things during the
first 100 days the Biden administration
did a resilience study and basically
looked at where the where the choke
points were. This was after COVID. It
was looking at pharmaceuticals. It was
looking But one of the big takeaways was
that we were so overdependent on China
for rare earth and critical materials um
critical minerals that we had to do
something ASAP. The Trump administration
and Trump one also understood that we
had this huge um vulnerability in
critical minerals and they had they
passed you know a number of executive
orders and tried to sort of get the
whole process started for mining
permitting you know reducing permitting
times um environmental you know
restrictions and and and uh and
timelines but I think it's it's again
it's a it's it's a complete parallel
with what happened in the run-up to to
World War II. We actually have seen this
coming for a very long time. And it
wasn't until China shut off the access
that it that the US and Europe kind of
woke up to the fact that this is a big
problem.
>> How often do you hear people in DC talk
about the potential for capital
misallocation when it comes to rare
earths? or is the idea of um I guess
cylindra with magnets is that not not as
much of a looming concern given the
urgency of the problem.
>> I think that that the um demonization of
risk taken on Celindra has really
plagued us for a long time. We have to
be much more ready to take risk and be
like hold hands on a bipartisan basis
and realize that this is a big moment
where we have to actually take more
risk.
>> So I do love all the analogies we've
used in this conversation. So obviously
synthetic rubber, but you mentioned
fracking before and a lot of people will
concede that fracking was incredibly
crucial to America's, you know, economic
well-being nowadays and we become an
energy exporter. But at the same time,
there's an externality, a negative
externality associated with fracking,
which is environmental damage. And
there's a lot of concern and also
controversy about how much impact that
actually has. what are the tradeoffs
that the US would have to think about as
we encourage more of a domestic rare
earth industry? So again, there are
there are trade-offs and I think one of
the, you know, I'm going to pivot back
to the innovation because I think one of
the ways we can do this in a clean way
is through some of these new
technologies. you were talking about
Berkeley and their you know the so Rio
Tinto is um is using a a proprietary new
microbe uh that they have that they've
just started um utilizing in some of
their old mines in Arizona where they
didn't have the ability um to
economically extract copper but using
microbes they are able in a clean way to
use a biotech solution to actually
extract copper on a Costco competitive
basis um that they were not able to
extract and they're rolling this out
right now. Um they'll be doing it you
know in in the coming in the in the
months ahead and I think it's it's
really noteworthy that uh that you have
a you know a large mining company that
is taking a plunge into a a a biotech
solution to how to unlock value that
they thought the mine was basically you
know it was it was closed. So we can do
that in a way that is clean. We can do
it in a way that's fast and cost
competitive. And so I think that there
are ways to do that in with using
innovation. Uh I don't think I I think
we need to be very mindful of that
because mining and and refining are
dirty businesses. That's just that's
life. And the if we can do them if we
can do them in a cleaner way then that
is a much more sustainable way to
actually have you know have an industry
moving forward that actually suits the
national interest.
>> We did that uh biotech uh VC episode so
much interesting biotech stuff that I
never really thought about like
industrial applications of much more to
do on uh learning about some of the
science. you know, one one thing you
mentioned um the national labs, they're
under threat, right? I mean, like you
talked about them as being this
important crown jewel of the US economy,
US industry, all these stories about
funding cuts, etc. What is the
intersection there? And from your
perspective anyway, are we undercutting
our own efforts through some of these uh
through some of these budgetary choices?
>> Uh absolutely. I mean, this is this is
something that we do really really well.
the whole world looks at the way that
the that DARPA and ARPA and the the
national labs that are associated are
actually like huge innovation engines
and it's you know often it's it's a
matter of of you know people coming in
entrepreneurs coming in and
understanding what the applications of
the science can be to commercialize it
but this is exactly the time where we
have to double down on the innovation
and the investment in R&D that is not
only in the national labs but also
universities ities because that's where
this is coming from as well. Nyron's you
know breakthrough came from the
University of Minnesota. So I think you
know you want to you want to make sure
that right now in this particular moment
where the where the the solutions can
come from biotech as opposed to mining
tech. Um it you don't want to be cutting
off any channels of investment in R&D
right now. Heidi Kbo Reiker, thank you
so much for coming on OddLots's
fascinating report. Encourage everyone
to go read it and check it out. There
are actually some ideas out there, not
just people identifying problems. That
was great.
>> Thank you so much. Great to be with you,
>> Tracy. I really want to learn more about
uh, you know, industrial biotech. Yeah.
Now, I mean, we mentioned it during the
conversation, but I feel like there
could be tons of interesting episodes on
the crossover of that sort of natural
science and mining and stuff like that.
Well, I'm looking at a page on Rio
Tinto's website right now, and the title
is Life Finds a Way: Microbes. And then
it says, "While dinosaurs vanished,
their tiny companions, microbes, adapted
and thrived, proving their resilience
over time, and now they can be used as
some of our most groundbreaking
advancements uh in mining." So,
>> that's pretty cool. Yeah, let's let's
get a scientist or something on there
and talk about microboscience. I kind of
want to see how all of this works. But
of course, you can't actually see the
microbes. So, I'll just have to think
about it. Just imagine.
>> It's got to be YouTube at least. We
could go on the road to some mine,
right? I'm sure. And like
>> it's just going to be water. I know that
just look like some water. No, but I I
thought that was really interesting. I
guess I thought, you know, in my mind
when I think about some of the when I
thought about the rare earth challenge
before, I sort of assumed I suppose that
okay, the US probably could um overcome
our industrial reliance at the cost of a
lot of money c basically a lot of loss
making investment because again that's
that's the nature of uh defense national
security is okay you just have to
sometimes spend money etc. So it's
interesting the prospect that there are
technologies that not only could solve
perhaps the sort of strategic element
but that actually could be cost
competitive perhaps could create export
opportunities could perhaps also be um
for profit. That's very interesting and
I hadn't really appreciated that prior
to Heidi's report. Yeah, I think the
overall thrust of the report this idea
of like, okay, you're not going to beat
China necessarily on its own territory
or you're certainly not going to beat
them in the same way that China has
developed this industry by, you know,
basically ignoring a lot of
environmental um concerns and things
like that. So you have to turn to the
US's own competitive advantage. Yeah.
Which is
>> research and development. Yeah. And also
like huge amounts of government capital
which you know sometimes we have an
issue deploying sometimes we don't. It
was super interesting that Heidi
described you know the recent cutting
off of China's rare earths as like the
moment where people have really realized
this is an issue and so there is the
potential to actually galvanize some
action. I have no doubt in my mind that
the US has the sort of capacity, the
knowhow, the science, the natural
resources, the money etc to do it. I
only question of course whether we have
the sort of organizational capacity and
of course you know the na the national
research labs are sort of the prime
example of the concern. Here is the site
with which a lot of these innovations
come from. there is this widespread
acknowledgement that this is a very
serious thing and apparently you know
they're seeing their budgets impaired at
the same time. Can everyone get on the
same page? Can we prioritize things? Can
we say like no we want to like move in
concert or do you just have these like
various like political fights and these
various factions etc that are not
coordinated that are not on the same
page that are working at cross purposes.
I am um that remains I that remains my
my main source of concern but perhaps
>> legitimate concern I would say
>> perhaps to your point maybe there has
been some uh galvanization and maybe
there are some paths here.
>> Wow. I'm still on this Rio Tinto side.
>> Yeah, you're seeing
>> it's great. It's they keep making
references to Jurassic Park which is not
something I expected uh from Rio Tinto.
But anyway, shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> All right. This has been another episode
of the A Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway. You can follow me at Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our producers
Kerman Rodriguez at Kerman Arman Dash
Bennett at Dashbot and Kale Brooks at
Kaleb Brooks.
>> And if you want more OddLots content,
you should check out our daily
newsletter. You'll find that at
bloomberg.com/odlotss.
And
>> you can join fellow listeners in
conversation 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please like or leave a comment or
better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.
>> [music]